Mengzhu Yu, Yu Yan, Tianwei Yan, Zihan Xi, Junchao Zeng, Tao Huang, Ming Xu, Mingyue Ding,
A two-stage multimodal learning framework based on text-driven vision pretraining and cross-modal feature fusion for thyroid ultrasound diagnosis,
Expert Systems with Applications,
Volume 312,
2026,
131440,
ISSN 0957-4174,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2026.131440.
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417426003532)
Abstract: Thyroid cancer is the most common endocrine cancer with a steadily rising incidence. In recent years, artificial intelligence, particularly deep learning, has shown great potential in assisting with the diagnosis of thyroid nodules. Despite these advances, existing approaches still face several challenges, including limited single-modal information, inadequate multimodal feature fusion, and a scarcity of multimodal datasets. Hence, this study proposes a Two-stage Text-driven Multimodal Network (TTM-Net), a novel network designed for thyroid nodule ultrasound diagnosis. In the first stage, a Text-Driven Vision Pretraining (TDVP) strategy is introduced to align visual and textual features using large-scale unlabeled text-image pairs, thereby enhancing the visual encoder’s ability to capture clinically relevant patterns from the thyroid ultrasound images. In the second stage, supervised classification training is conducted using labeled data. Visual and textual features are integrated via the Cross-Modal Concat-Attention Fusion (CMCAF) module, and a joint optimization strategy is employed to improve diagnostic performance. To overcome the limitations of TI RADS, we propose a Thyroid Nodule Ultrasound Feature Classification System for Artificial Intelligence (TNUFCS-AI), which integrates clinical domain knowledge. Based on this system, we constructed a structured multimodal thyroid dataset comprising 22,544 ultrasound images and corresponding clinical reports from 9466 patients. Experiments show that TTM-Net outperforms SOTA methods in classification accuracy, stability, and interpretability, achieving (94.98 ± 0.15%) accuracy. In summary, TTM-Net significantly improves the diagnostic performance and increases the model robustness while alleviating the dependence on labeled data, providing a viable solution for developing high-performance, interpretable, and deployable AI-assisted diagnostic systems for thyroid nodules.
Keywords: Thyroid nodule diagnosis; Multimodal fusion; Unsupervised pretraining; Attention mechanism
